ACTON-NEW(1)

NAME
       acton-new — Create a new Acton project

SYNOPSIS
       acton new [options] path

DESCRIPTION
       Create a new Acton project in the given directory.

       The command creates the target directory if it does not exist, copies
       the selected template scaffold, writes starter project files such as
       Acton.toml, .env, .editorconfig, and .gitignore, installs the bundled
       standard library, and optionally initializes Git hooks and AGENTS.md
       guidance.

       If _path_ already exists as a directory, acton new fails instead of
       trying to merge into that directory, even when it is empty. acton new .
       is the explicit exception: it scaffolds into the current directory and
       may overwrite existing files whose paths collide with the selected
       template.

       If git is available in PATH, acton new runs git init in the project
       directory and then runs git add ., which stages all current-directory
       changes, not only files created by the scaffold.

       The command does not create an initial commit.

OPTIONS
   New Options
       path
           Directory to create the project in. Use . to create a new project in
           the current directory.

       --name name
           Project name. If not provided, interactive mode prompts for it and
           defaults to the target directory name.

       --description description
           Project description written to Acton.toml. If not provided, Acton
           uses A TON blockchain project by default. In interactive mode you
           can override it after opting into advanced options.

       --template template
           Project template to use.

           Possible values: empty, counter, jetton, nft

           If not provided, interactive mode prompts for the template.

       --license license
           License identifier to place into Acton.toml and use for the
           generated LICENSE file when Acton has a built-in template for that
           license.

           If not provided, Acton uses MIT by default. In interactive mode you
           can override it after opting into advanced options.

       --app
           Include the template’s TypeScript app scaffold when available.

           At the moment only the counter template supports the app layout. If
           you pass --app for a template that does not support it, acton new
           fails.

           If the selected template supports the app layout and --app is not
           provided, interactive mode prompts for this choice. Non-interactive
           mode leaves the app layout disabled unless --app is passed
           explicitly.

       --hooks
           Create and install the default project-local Git hooks.

           If git is available and --hooks is not provided, interactive mode
           offers this choice after you opt into advanced options.
           Non-interactive mode leaves hooks disabled unless --hooks is passed
           explicitly.

       --agents
           Include an AGENTS.md file with coding-agent guidance from the
           selected template.

           If --agents is not provided, interactive mode offers this choice
           after you opt into advanced options. Non-interactive mode leaves
           AGENTS.md disabled unless --agents is passed explicitly.

   Display Options
       --color when
           Control when to use colored output.

           Possible values: auto, always, never

   Project Options
       --manifest-path path
           Accepted as a global Acton option for CLI consistency.

           acton new creates a project and does not require an existing
           Acton.toml. The command does not resolve a project manifest before
           running, and this option remains mutually exclusive with
           --project-root.

       --project-root path
           Accepted as a global Acton option for CLI consistency.

           acton new creates a project and does not require an existing project
           root. The command does not resolve a project root before running,
           and this option remains mutually exclusive with --manifest-path.

TEMPLATES
   empty
       Minimal project skeleton with:

       o  one starter contract

       o  generated wrapper and tests

       o  deployment script

       o  CI workflow

       o  optional AGENTS.md

   counter
       Counter contract template with:

       o  one contract, wrapper, and tests

       o  deployment script

       o  CI workflow

       o  optional AGENTS.md

       This template also supports the optional TypeScript app layout with
       --app.

       With --app, Acton also creates a Vite-based React app, a generated
       TypeScript wrapper, and top-level npm metadata files.

   jetton
       Jetton minter and wallet template with:

       o  multi-contract scaffold

       o  wrappers and tests

       o  deployment script

       o  CI workflow

       o  optional AGENTS.md

   nft
       NFT collection and item template with:

       o  collection and item contracts

       o  wrappers and tests

       o  deployment scripts

       o  CI workflow

       o  optional AGENTS.md

INTERACTIVE MODE
       When enough information is missing and standard input/output are
       connected to a terminal, acton new uses a short default flow:

       o  project name

       o  template

       o  whether to include the TypeScript app layout when the template
          supports it

       o  whether to configure advanced options

       If you opt into advanced options, Acton can then prompt for:

       o  description

       o  license

       o  whether to install the default Git hooks when git is available

       o  whether to include AGENTS.md

       If you skip advanced options, Acton keeps the default description A TON
       blockchain project, the default license MIT, and leaves optional
       features disabled unless their flags are passed explicitly.

       In non-interactive mode, optional features stay disabled unless their
       flags are passed explicitly. For CI or scripts, pass --name,
       --description, --template, and --license if you want to avoid prompts
       entirely.

FILES
       The generated project always includes:

       o  Acton.toml

       o  .acton/

       o  .env

       o  .editorconfig

       o  .gitignore

       Depending on the selected template and options, Acton may also generate:

       o  contract sources

       o  tests

       o  wrappers

       o  wrappers that usually include helper shapes such as fromStorage(...),
          deploy(...), send{Name}(...), sendAny(...), and typed get-method
          calls

       o  deployment scripts

       o  [scripts] aliases such as deploy-emulation and deploy-testnet in
          Acton.toml

       o  frontend files for --app

       o  .githooks/pre-commit for --hooks

       o  AGENTS.md for --agents

COUNTER APP LAYOUT
       When acton new --template counter --app is used, the project includes:

       o  contracts/src for contract sources and shared Tolk types

       o  contracts/tests for tests and generated Tolk wrappers

       o  contracts/scripts for deployment and utility scripts

       o  wrappers-ts/ for the generated TypeScript wrapper used by the app

       o  app/ for the React + Vite frontend

       o  top-level package.json and package-lock.json for the frontend
          toolchain

       Before running frontend commands, install the app dependencies:

           npm ci

       The generated app scaffold is a real frontend workspace, not just static
       demo files. After npm ci, use the usual frontend lifecycle commands from
       the generated package.json alongside normal Acton contract commands.

       Typical commands in that generated app workspace:

       o  npm run dev to start the Vite development server

       o  npm run build to build both contracts and the frontend bundle

       o  npm run preview to preview the production bundle locally

       o  npm run typecheck for TypeScript checking

       o  npm test to run the bundled acton test command

SIDE EFFECTS
       acton new writes only inside the chosen target directory. When _path_ is
       ., that means the current directory itself, and existing files with the
       same paths as template files can be overwritten.

       It also installs .acton/tolk-stdlib there, may create .githooks/ plus an
       AGENTS.md file when requested, and, when git is available, initializes
       the project repository and runs git add ., which stages all
       current-directory contents.

       The command does not create a commit and does not modify parent
       directories.

EXIT STATUS
       o  0: The project scaffold was created successfully.

       o  1: Project creation failed because the target path already existed, a
          prompt could not be completed, or a filesystem/setup step failed.

EXAMPLES
       1. Create a new project in my-project:

              acton new my-project

       2. Create a non-interactive counter project with explicit metadata:

              acton new my-project --name "My Project" --description "Cool description" --template counter --license MIT

       3. Create the counter template with the TypeScript app layout:

              acton new my-project --template counter --app

       4. Create a project and include AGENTS.md guidance:

              acton new my-project --template empty --agents

       5. Create a project in the current directory:

              acton new . --template empty --name "My Project" --description "A TON blockchain project" --license MIT

SEE ALSO
       o  acton help init

       o  Project initialization guide
          <https://ton-blockchain.github.io/acton/docs/project-init>

       o  Build system configuration reference
          <https://ton-blockchain.github.io/acton/docs/build-system/configuration-reference>

