ACTON-RETRACE(1)

NAME
       acton-retrace — Replay an on-chain transaction locally for inspection

SYNOPSIS
       acton retrace [options] hash

DESCRIPTION
       Download a transaction by hash and replay it locally in the TON sandbox.

       acton retrace is useful for debugging failures, inspecting outgoing
       actions, reviewing VM and executor logs, and comparing local replay
       results with the original on-chain execution.

       When --contract is provided, Acton also prepares a source-level retrace
       for the named project contract by recompiling it with debug info and
       source maps. When --debug is added, the prepared replay is exposed as a
       local Debug Adapter Protocol (DAP) server for editor integration.

OPTIONS
   Retrace Options
       hash
           Transaction hash in hex format.

       --net network
           Network to retrace from.

           Without this flag, Acton tries mainnet first and then falls back to
           testnet.

       --verbose
           Show full cell hex in outgoing actions instead of only hashes.

       --logs-dir dir
           Write VM and executor logs into the specified directory.

   Source-Level Debugging Options
       --contract name
           Contract name from Acton.toml used to build a source-level trace for
           the retraced transaction.

       --debug
           Expose the prepared source-level retrace as a local DAP server.

           Requires --contract.

       --debug-port port
           Debug server port to use with --debug.

           When omitted, Acton uses 12345.

   Display Options
       --color when
           Control when to use colored output.

           Possible values: auto, always, never

   Project Options
       --manifest-path path
           Path to the Acton.toml file to use for this invocation.

           Use this when running the command outside the project directory or
           when the manifest lives at a non-default location.

       --project-root path
           Path to the project root to use for configuration discovery and
           relative defaults.

           This conflicts with --manifest-path.

NETWORK AND API BEHAVIOR
       o  Without --net, Acton tries mainnet and then testnet

       o  localnet and custom:<name> are not supported by the retrace backend

TONCENTER API KEYS
       Built-in mainnet/testnet requests read TONCENTER_MAINNET_API_KEY or
       TONCENTER_TESTNET_API_KEY, depending on the selected network.

       Acton loads .env automatically, so the simplest setup during project
       work is usually to keep these keys there and use shell environment
       variables only for one-off overrides or CI.

       If no matching key is configured, Acton throttles requests to reduce
       rate-limit failures.

       For library fallback lookups, retrace also supports DTON_API_KEY from
       the environment.

SOURCE-LEVEL RETRACE
       When --contract is set:

       o  the contract must exist in the resolved Acton.toml

       o  the selected source must be a .tolk contract

       o  Acton refreshes the bundled stdlib under .acton/ before preparing the
          source-level retrace

       o  Acton recompiles the contract for the current invocation with debug
          info and source maps

       o  no prior acton build --debug step is required, but the current local
          sources and import mappings must compile cleanly

       o  the recompilation must return both source maps and debug marks;
          missing either is a hard error

       o  the compiled local code hash must match the code hash used by the
          retraced transaction

       If you run the command outside the project directory, use
       --manifest-path or --project-root so Acton can resolve the contract
       configuration and import mappings.

DEBUG MODE
       When --debug is used together with --contract:

       o  Acton starts a local DAP server on 127.0.0.1:<port>

       o  the normal retrace summary is still printed before the debug server
          starts

       o  the command stays attached to that debug session until the client
          disconnects

       This mode is intended for editor integrations that speak the Debug
       Adapter Protocol.

       --debug-port follows the same convention as other Acton debug commands:
       without --debug it does not start a debug server.

       Current replay-debug limits:

       o  the retrace adapter exposes one DAP thread only

       o  replay sessions do not expose the live Registers scope available in
          local debug sessions

       o  the supported request set is intentionally narrow: source
          breakpoints, continue/step, stack/scopes/variables, exception info,
          evaluate, and disconnect

       o  unsupported client-specific extension requests are ignored rather
          than emulated

VS CODE SETUP
       Typical setup:

       1. Install or load the TON VS Code extension.

       2. Make sure VS Code can find your acton binary.

          If needed, point the extension at a specific binary with an
          environment variable such as ACTON_BIN, or start VS Code from a shell
          where acton is already on PATH.

       3. Open the project workspace that contains the target contract in
          Acton.toml.

       4. Start a retrace debug session either through the extension command or
          through a manual launch.json entry.

       For a manual setup, create .vscode/launch.json like this:

           {
             "version": "0.2.0",
             "configurations": [
               {
                 "type": "tolk",
                 "request": "launch",
                 "name": "Attach to Acton Retrace",
                 "debugServer": 4711
               }
             ]
           }

       Then start retrace in a terminal from the project root:

           acton retrace <HASH> --contract <NAME> --debug --debug-port 4711

       After the DAP server is listening, launch the matching VS Code debug
       configuration. Breakpoints should be set in the same .tolk sources that
       belong to the selected contract from Acton.toml.

OUTPUT
       The command prints:

       o  network selection and state-hash check status

       o  transaction metadata and fee summary

       o  compute and action phase summaries

       o  decoded outgoing actions

       o  additional full VM and executor logs when --logs-dir is used

       o  source-level debug preparation errors when --contract is used

       o  DAP startup status when --debug is used

       When --logs-dir is set, Acton creates the target directory and writes
       vm.log plus executor.log there.

EXIT STATUS
       o  0: The transaction was fetched and replayed successfully.

       o  1: The transaction could not be found, network lookup failed, replay
          data was incomplete, local contract validation or compilation failed,
          the local code hash did not match the retraced account code, the DAP
          server could not start, or local log files could not be written.

EXAMPLES
       1. Retrace with automatic network fallback:

              acton retrace 3c1b02a33390e596d83b306eab57b3f7271bc90e2e527ea4cafccfde25139d41

       2. Force mainnet and use an API key from the environment:

              TONCENTER_MAINNET_API_KEY=your-key acton retrace 3c1b02a33390e596d83b306eab57b3f7271bc90e2e527ea4cafccfde25139d41 --net mainnet

       3. Save logs and show full outgoing cell bodies:

              acton retrace 3c1b02a33390e596d83b306eab57b3f7271bc90e2e527ea4cafccfde25139d41 --verbose --logs-dir build/retrace

       4. Prepare a source-level retrace for a project contract:

              acton retrace 3c1b02a33390e596d83b306eab57b3f7271bc90e2e527ea4cafccfde25139d41 --contract JettonMinter

       5. Start a local DAP server for editor debugging:

              acton retrace 3c1b02a33390e596d83b306eab57b3f7271bc90e2e527ea4cafccfde25139d41 --contract JettonMinter --debug --debug-port 4711

SEE ALSO
       o  acton help disasm

       o  Retrace command guide
          <https://ton-blockchain.github.io/acton/docs/commands/retrace>

